6.824 Bitcoin FAQ

Q: I don't understand why the blockchain is so important. Isn't the
requirement for the owner's signature on each transaction enough to
prevent bitcoins from being stolen?

A: The signature is not enough, because it doesn't prevent the owner
from spending money twice: signing two transactions that transfer the
same bitcoin to different recipients. The blockchain acts as a
publishing system to try to ensure that once a bitcoin has been spent
once, lots of participants will know, and will be able to reject a
second spend.

Q: Why does Bitcoin need to define a new currency? Wouldn't it be more
convenient to use an existing currency like dollars?

A: The new currency (Bitcoins) allows the system to motivate miners
with freshly created money; this would be harder with dollars because
it's illegal for ordinary people to create fresh dollars. One would
also need a way to connect balances and transactions on a
dollar-denominated blockchain with dollars in the external world. But
have a look at "stablecoins" such as Tether.

Q: Why is the purpose of proof-of-work?

A: It makes it hard for an attacker to convince the system to switch
to a blockchain fork in which a coin is spent in a different way than
in the main fork. You can view proof-of-work as making a random choice
over the participating CPUs of who gets to choose which fork to
extend. If the attacker controls only a few CPUs, the attacker won't
be able to extend a new malicious fork fast enough to overtake the
main blockchain.

Q: Could a Bitcoin-like system use something less wasteful than
proof-of-work?

A: Proof-of-work is hard to fake or simulate, a nice property in a
totally open system like Bitcoin where you cannot trust anyone to
follow rules. The main alternative is proof-of-stake, as used in
Ethereum, Algorand, and Byzcoin. Have a look at
https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/ In a
smallish closed system, in which the participants are known and mostly
trusted, Byzantine agreement protocols could be used, as in
Hyperledger, or variants of it as in Stellar.

Q: Can Alice spend the same coin twice by sending "pay Bob" and "pay
Charlie" to different subsets of miners?

A: Suppose Alice does that. One of the two subsets of miners is likely
to find the nonce for a new block first. Let's assume the first block
to be found is B50 and it contains "pay Bob". This block will be
flooded to all miners, so the miners working on "pay Charlie" will
switch to mining a successor block to B50. These miners validate
transactions they place in blocks, so they will notice that the "pay
Charlie" coin was spent in B50, and they will ignore the "pay Charlie"
transaction. Thus, in this scenario, double-spend won't work.

There's a small chance that two miners find blocks at the same time,
perhaps B50' containing "pay Bob" and B50'' containing "pay Charlie".
At this point there's a fork in the block chain. These two blocks will
be flooded to all the nodes. Each node will start mining a successor
to one of them (the first it hears). Again the most likely outcome is
that a single miner will finish significantly before any other miner,
and flood the successor, and most peers will switch to that winning
fork. The chance of repeatedly having two miners simultaneously find
blocks gets very small as the forks get longer. So eventually all the
peers will switch to the same fork, and in that fork there will be
only one spend of the coin.

The possibility of accidentally having a short-lived fork is the
reason that careful clients wait until there are a few successor
blocks before believing a transaction.

Q: It takes an average of 10 minutes for a Bitcoin block to be
validated. Does this mean that the parties involved aren't sure if the
transaction really happened until 10 minutes later?

A: Yes. The 10 minutes is awkward. But it's not always a problem. For
example, suppose you buy a toaster oven with Bitcoin from a web site.
The web site can check that the transaction is known by a few servers,
though not yet in a block, and show you a "purchase completed" page.
Before shipping it to you, they should check that the transaction is
in a block. For low-value in-person transactions, such as buying a cup
of coffee, it's probably enough for the seller to ask a few peers to
check that the bitcoins haven't already been spent (i.e. it's
reasonably safe to not bother waiting for the transaction to appear in
the blockchain at all). For a large in-person purchase (e.g., a car),
it is important to wait for sufficiently long to be assured that the
block will stay in the block chain before handing over the goods.

Q: What can be done to speed up transactions on the blockchain?

A: I think the constraint here is that 10 minutes needs to be much
larger (i.e. >= 10x) than the time to broadcast a newly found block to
all peers. The point of that is to minimize the chances of two peers
finding new blocks at about the same time, before hearing about the
other peer's block. Two new blocks at the same time is a fork; forks
are bad since they cause disagreement about which transactions are
real, and they waste miners' time. Since blocks can be pretty big (up
to a megabyte), and peers could have slow Internet links, and the
diameter of the peer network might be large, it could easily take a
minute to flood a new block. If one could reduce the flooding time,
then the 10 minutes could also be reduced.

Q: Bitcoin is limited to processing no more than a few transactions
per second, due to the 10 minutes and the limit of one megabyte per
block. Why the one megabyte limit?

A: I think the worry was that huge blocks would take a long time to
flood to peers with low-speed links. Here's a discussion:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin_scalability_problem

When Bitcoin was originally designed, the intent was that lots of
ordinary people do the mining on ordinary computers, connected with
relatively slow home Internet links. Such a system could not have
supported a huge transaction rate, and would have taken a long time to
flood new blocks. The original design has proved difficult to modify,
since there's no central authority that can change things.

Q: The entire blockchain needs to be downloaded before a node can
participate in the network. Won't that take an impractically long time
as the blockchain grows?

A: It's true that it takes a while for a new node to get all the
transactions. But once a given server has done this work, it can save
the block chain, and doesn't need to fetch it again. It only needs to
know about new blocks, which is not a huge burden. On the other hand
most ordinary users of Bitcoin don't run full Bitcoin nodes; instead
they trust a few full nodes to answer questions about whether coins
have already been spent.

Q: Is it feasible for an attacker to gain a majority of the computing
power among peers? What are the implications for bitcoin if this happens?

A: It may be feasible; some people think that big cooperative groups
of miners have been close to a majority at times:
http://www.coindesk.com/51-attacks-real-threat-bitcoin/

If >50% of compute power is controlled by a single entity, they can
double-spend bitcoins: transfer a coin to one payee, and then generate
a new fork from before that transaction in which the transaction
doesn't exist. Bitcoin's security would be broken if this happened.

Q: From some news stories, I have heard that a large number of bitcoin
miners are controlled by a small number of companies.

A: True. See here: https://blockchain.info/pools. It looks like four
mining pools together hold about half of the compute power today.

Q: Are there any ways for Bitcoin mining to do useful work, beyond simply
brute-force calculating SHA-256 hashes?

A: Maybe -- here are two attempts to do what you suggest:
https://www.cs.umd.edu/~elaine/docs/permacoin.pdf
http://primecoin.io/

Q: There is hardware specifically designed to mine Bitcoin. How does
this type of hardware differ from the type of hardware in a laptop?

A: Mining hardware has a lot of transistors dedicated to computing
SHA256 quickly, but is not particularly fast for other operations.
Ordinary server and laptop CPUs can do many things (e.g. floating
point division) reasonably quickly, but don't have so much hardware
dedicated to SHA256 specifically. Some Intel CPUs do have instructions
specifically for SHA256; however, they aren't competitive with
specialized Bitcoin hardware that massively parallelizes the hashing
using lots of dedicated transistors.

Q: The paper estimates that the disk space required to store the block
chain will grow by 4.2 megabytes per year. That seems very low!

A: The 4.2 MB/year is for just the block headers, and is still the
actual rate of growth. The current 470+GB is for full blocks.

Q: Would the advent of quantum computing break the bitcoin system?

A: Here's a plausible-looking article:
http://www.bitcoinnotbombs.com/bitcoin-vs-the-nsas-quantum-computer/
Quantum computers might be able to forge bitcoin's digital signatures
(ECDSA). That is, once you send out a transaction with your public key
in it, someone with a quantum computer could probably sign a different
transaction for your money, and there's a reasonable chance that the
bitcoin system would see the attacker's transaction before your
transaction.

Q: Bitcoin uses the hash of the transaction record to identify the
transaction, so it can be named in future transactions. Is this
guaranteed to lead to unique IDs?

A: The hashes are technically not guaranteed to be unique. But in
practice the hash function (SHA-256) is believed to produce different
outputs for different inputs with fantastically high probability.

Q: It sounds like anyone can create new Bitcoins. Why is that OK?
Won't it lead to forgery or inflation?

A: Only the person who first computes a proper nonce for the current
last block in the chain gets the 6.25-bitcoin reward for "mining" it. It
takes a huge amount of computation to do this. If you buy a computer
and have it spend all its time attempting to mine bitcoin blocks, you
will not make enough bitcoins to pay for the computer.

Q: The paper mentions that some amount of fraud is admissible; where
does this fraud come from?

A: This part of the paper is about problems with the current way of
paying for things, e.g. credit cards. Fraud occurs when you buy
something on the Internet, but the seller keeps the money and doesn't
send you the item. Or if a merchant remembers your credit card number,
and buys things with it without your permission. Or if someone buys
something with a credit card, but never pays the credit card bill. Or
if someone buys something with a stolen credit card.

Q: Has there been fraudulent use of Bitcoin?

A: Yes. I think most of the problems have been at web sites that act
as wallets to store peoples' bitcoin private keys. Such web sites,
since they have access to the private keys, can transfer their
customers' money to anyone. So someone who works at (or breaks into)
such a web site can steal the customers' Bitcoins.

If people used Bitcoin to buy things, we'd probably see fraud in the
form of sellers accepting payment but not delivering the goods.

Q: Satoshi's paper mentions that each transaction has a transaction
fee that is given to whoever mined the block. Why would a miner not
simply try to mine blocks with transactions with the highest
transaction fees?

A: Miners do favor transactions with higher fees. You can read about
typical approaches here:
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Transaction_fees
And here's a graph (the red line) of how long your transaction waits
as a function of how high a fee you offer:
https://bitcoinfees.github.io/misc/profile/

Q: Why would a miner bother including transactions that yield no fee?

A: I think many don't mine no-fee transactions any more.

Q: How are transaction fees determined/advertised?

A: Have a look here:
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Transaction_fees
Different miners use different strategies to decide
which transactions to include in blocks.
It sounds like (by default) wallets look in the block chain at the
recent correlation between fee and time until a transaction is
included in a mined block, and choose a fee that correlates with
relatively quick inclusion.
Fees are typically around a dollor or two per transaction.

Q: What are some techniques for storing my personal bitcoins, in
particular the private keys needed to spend my bitcoins? I've heard of
people printing out the keys, replicating them on USB, etc. Does a
secure online repository exist?

A: Any scheme that keeps the private keys on a computer attached to
the Internet is a tempting target for thieves. On the other hand, it's
a pain to use your bitcoins if the private keys are on a sheet of
paper. So my guess is that careful people store the private keys for
small amounts on their computer, but for large balances they store the
keys offline.

Q: What other kinds of virtual currency were there before and after
Bitcoin (I know the paper mentioned hashcash)? What was different
about Bitcoin that led it to have more success than its predecessors?

A: There were many previous proposals for digital cash systems, none
with any noticeable success. It's tempting to think that Bitcoin has
succeeded because its design is better than others: that it has
just the right blend of incentives and decentralization and ease of
use. But there are too many forgotten yet apparently well-designed
technologies out there for me to believe that.

Q: What happens when more (or fewer) people mine Bitcoin?

A: Bitcoin adjusts the difficulty to match the measured compute power
devoted to mining. So if more and more computers mine, the mining
difficulty will get harder, but only hard enough to maintain the average
inter-block interval at 10 minutes. If lots of people stop mining, the
difficulty will decrease. This mechanism won't prevent new blocks from
being created, it will just ensure that they are created about every
10 minutes on average.

Q: Is there any way to make Bitcoin completely anonymous?

A: Have a look here: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zerocoin

Q: If I lose the private key(s) associated with the bitcoins I own,
how can I get my money back?

A: You can't.

Q: What do people buy and sell with bitcoins?

A: Much of the action in bitcoin is investment: people buying bitcoin
in the hope that its price will go up. There seems to be a fair amount
of illegal activity that exploits Bitcoin's relative anonymity (buying
illegal drugs, demanding ransom). You can buy some ordinary (legal)
stuff on the Internet with Bitcoin too; have a look here:
https://cointelegraph.com/bitcoin-for-beginners/what-can-you-buy-with-bitcoin-a-beginners-guide-to-spending-your-btc
It's a bit of a pain, though, so I don't imagine many non-enthusiasts
would use bitcoin in preference to a credit card.

Q: Why is bitcoin illegal in some countries?

A: Here are some guesses.

Many governments adjust the supply of money in order to achieve
certain economic goals, such as low inflation, high employment, and
stable exchange rates. Widespread use of bitcoin may make that harder.

Many governments regulate banks (and things that function as banks) in
order to prevent problems, e.g. banks going out of business and
thereby causing their customers to lose deposits. This has happened to
some bitcoin exchanges. Since bitcoin can't easily be regulated, maybe
the next best thing is to outlaw it.

Bitcoin seems particularly suited to certain illegal transactions
because it is fairly anonymous. Governments regulate big transfers of
conventional money (banks must report big transfers) in order to track
illegal activity; but you can't easily do this with bitcoin.

Q: Why do bitcoins have any value at all? Why do people accept it as
money?

A: Because other people are willing to sell things in return for
bitcoins, and are willing to exchange bitcoins for ordinary currency
such as dollars. This is a circular argument, but has worked many
times in the past; consider why people view baseball trading cards as
having value, or why they think paper money has value.

Q: How is the price of Bitcoin determined?

A: The price of Bitcoin in other currencies (e.g. euros or dollars) is
determined by supply and demand. If more people want to buy Bitcoins
than sell them, the price will go up. If the opposite, then the price
will go down. There is no single price; instead, there is just recent
history of what prices people have been willing to buy and sell at on
public exchanges. The public exchanges bring buyers and sellers
together, and publish the prices they agree to:

  https://bitcoin.org/en/exchanges

Q: Why is the price of bitcoin so volatile?

A: The price is driven partially by people's hopes and fears. When
they are optimistic about Bitcoin, or see that the price is rising,
they buy so as not to miss out, and thus bid the price up further.
When they read negative news stories about Bitcoin or the economy in
general, they sell out of fear that the price will drop and cause them
to lose money. This kind of speculation happens with many goods;
there's nothing special about Bitcoin in this respect. For example:

  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tulip_mania

Q: How should we think about which parts of Bitcoin's design solve
which problems?

A: Here's one way to think about problems and solutions.

Because Bitcoin transactions are signed, they can't be forged without
the owner's private key, so money can't directly be stolen. The
remaining attacks are theft of private keys, and double-spending by
causing different parties to see different transactions or by causing
transactions to disappear.

All Bitcoin peers flood all the blocks they know of to other peers, so
it's likely that all peers will know of all transactions. Thus it's
hard to reveal a transaction to one peer, but conceal it from another.

Each block contains a hash over what the block's creator thought was
the previous block in the chain, and thus implicitly over the whole
chain back to the origin. This means there's a unique and agreed-on
sequence of blocks (and transactions) leading up to each block, but
leaves open the possibility that the blocks form a tree with multiple
forks, rather than a single chain.

One fork could contain a transaction transferring funds to one
recipient, and another fork could contain a transaction transferring
the same funds to a different recipient. So it's important that the
peers agree on which is the "real" fork, so that they agree on who
owns what. It's also important that it be hard for someone to cause
agreement to switch from one fork to another; such a switch would
allow double-spending.

Part of Bitcoin's plan for agreement is that peers always use the fork
with the longest path from the origin. But what if two leaves are the
same distance from the origin? Bitcoin's proof-of-work mining
mechanism makes it likely that one peer will mine a new block
extending one of these leaves significantly before any other peer
completes mining; and will flood that block to all peers; and then
most peers will agree that the newly mined block forms the longest
fork, breaking the tie. The winning miner is effectively randomly
selected, making it likely that it is honest and will follow the rules
and actually flood the block.

An attacker could try to double-spend by transferring funds one way,
and then causing an alternate fork with a different spend to grow
longer than the original fork; the longest-fork rule would then cause
everyone to switch forks. Bitcoin's proof-of-work mining makes it hard
to force a switch from the longest fork to an initially shorter fork,
since more peers will be working to extend the longest fork than to
extend the fraudulent fork. Because a switch from one fork to another
is not impossible if the longest fork is only one or two blocks
longer, careful recipients only believe in a transaction if it's still
in the longest fork after a few more blocks have been mined.
